Good morning. Good morning. Good morning, Chair. Good morning,
Good morning. Thank you for taking the time to join us this morning. We have you in here for 15 minutes, 10 minutes, 10 minutes.
I'd just like to welcome you on behalf of the committee. You've both got personal lived experience through this and put together a very helpful pack for us to consider.
So I'll hand that time over to you now. If you want to leave us any questions, you may, but that's yours. Thank you.
Hello, Maureen, everyone, and thank you for the opportunity to present today. My name is Gerard Rushton, and I'm Chairman of the Meningitis Foundation of Aotearoa, New Zealand.
I had with me today Penny Taylor, a meningitis survivor. We presented to this committee in 2022, at which time we had support from all parties across Parliament.
We also had support from Tafata Ora, Pharmac and the House Select Committee. There has been some progress since then, but our adolescents are still at risk.
So why does meningitis, I'll just ask for the next slide, please.
What is meningitis prevention and awareness matter? The mortality and morbidity rate of meningitis makes it one of the most feared diseases.
It can take a life in a matter of hours, hence the need to protect people with vaccinations, because often treatment comes too late.
The current criteria for adolescence vaccinations means the majority of our at-risk adolescents are simply not protected.
Recent cases in Dunedin in the UK are a stark reminder that without a full and equitable vaccination programme, how quickly an outbreak can grow.
And we believe New Zealand is grossly unprepared to deal with such an outbreak.
Next slide, please.
I'd like now to introduce Penny Taylor. Penny is one of our VIPs, a very impacted person. So thank you Penny, I'd just like to hear your story now.
Sorry, I have a few notes, because my brain does move around a little bit.
So 15 years ago, I contracted meningococcal, and it was a normal typical day.
I was a mum of three and a seven-year-old, and the only symptom I had was vomiting out of all of the symptoms that there are.
I naturally thought it was a bug from my daughter's daycare centre. Within hours, my mum came past my house and found me unconscious.
I was taken to Palmerston Health Hospital, and at that point I was given 30 minutes to live in a 2% survival chance.
So I spent one month in a coma. I blew up twice the size of myself, and all my organs had failed.
And I had a 42 degree temperature, which I was essentially frying from the inside.
As a result, with my organs failing, I then had septicemia come in.
And as you can see by my pictures, it took hold, and I looked like a very severe case of frostbite over my legs and fingers.
After a month, they woke me up, and the Palmerston Health Hospital knew that I would need debriding and skin grafting amputations.
Dialysis is a severe range of internal treatment.
They were trying to get me into Waikato Hospital because the burns and the dialysis is all in the one hospital.
They wouldn't accept me because I was out of the region.
So I was helicoptered to Hutt Hospital for the plastics, and was in their high dependency ward.
At that point, I had my amputation, so I still was at very high risk that I wasn't going to make this surgery.
So after 12 hours, they amputated my legs, they amputated my fingers and my hand, and did all my skin grafting all over my body.
The next month was probably the most tortuous part of the whole journey that needed.
It didn't really need to happen had I gone to Waikato.
Morning and night, I was having surgeries, and in between they were transporting me to Wellington Hospital for dialysis.
So every single bump, touch, I would feel.
The dialysis, although it was working for my kidneys, it would dialyse all the medication, so it left me with nothing to come back on.
And so I was playing catch-up every single day with pain meds.
That was excruciating.
After that, I was transferred back to Palmerston Hospital for rehabilitation.
The hand therapist was on holiday and they had no one else, and as a result, my hand is frozen, and I have limited function in it.
And that is not from the disease, that is from lack of physiotherapy.
As soon as I was out of hospital, everything stopped.
I had no aftercare, I had no physiotherapy, I was there to fight for myself.
I had two small children.
So I was in a wheelchair.
Largely my mum and dad were there to help support me.
But it took me, I had to make a decision to financially, I needed to go back to work because I couldn't survive.
So the only way I could go back, I was to go back part-time because physically I was exhausted.
I was still trying to recover from this disease, run a family and try and have an income.
So it was pretty tough going.
Then came the days of prosthetics.
As you can imagine, my skins were very, very delicate and scarred.
So when I went to the limb centre in Wellington, they literally looked at me and didn't think they could help.
So the five years of working part-time in a five-year battle of prosthetics resulted basically me in a wheelchair.
So completely frustrated by that entire system that prosthetics was my only option, the traditional sockets.
I went searching for something else, which I found a surgeon in Australia who does osteointegration surgery.
And that is an implant that directly goes into your skeleton.
No socket, my skin would be okay.
I qualified for that surgery with my bone density and my internal organs being reasonably healthy.
Once I had that surgery, I had that surgery 10 years ago.
I then went right back to square one to a wheelchair again and I had a two-year rehabilitation program run through the Australian team.
What that surgery has given me back, sorry, on that surgery that was completely unsupported by New Zealand.
They thought I was putting myself at risk and they did not support my decision to have that surgery.
So 10 years of that surgery, I have battled on my own and self-advocated for myself.
But what that surgery has given me, I had to fundraise for the surgery and pay for it myself.
What it has given me, it's enabled me to go back to work full-time.
I am a gym goer.
I walk over 10,000 steps a day.
I do what everyone else does and so that was worth it for me.
I actually got my life back by choosing to fund this myself and make that decision.
I have since worked with the limb centre and with the 10 years of history that I have to present that this could be an option for people.
So this, I guess for me, I have the drive and the motivation to self-advocate and fight through.
I had my two children to live for and that was my driving force.
However, not everyone has that and they don't have a voice, which is a real kicker for me.
The last 15 years has been a complete roller coaster and I have literally done it on my own.
A vaccine could have saved all of that for me.
I was 36 years of age so I was outside of the normal age bracket.
The mental and the physical and the financial impact that has had on me in the last 15 years is significant.
I am evidence of what it does do and the varying conditions that people are left with if they do survive.
Thank you, Penny.
I think you've changed the slide.
Very brave of you to come here today and share your story.
It's traumatic and I could leave my presentation there because there's justification in its own
for what we're talking about.
Clearly from Penny's presentation, the New Zealand health system is failing us with limited vaccine access,
lack of support for survivors.
We have no fence at the top of the cliff and we have no ambulance at the bottom either.
Since the implementation of the infant vaccination programme in 2023,
the vaccination rates in their infants have raised
and the number of cases of infant meningitis have noticeably reduced.
So the vaccine actually works.
We're concerned the adolescent criteria is far too narrow.
It's confusing.
We question the rationale around it.
Why is it right that someone that can afford to go to boarding school
or be in the halls of residence should qualify for a free vaccination
against anyone else who's an adolescent in our country?
Our Marian Pacifica population of five times more likely to contract meningitis,
yet most of them do not qualify for a free vaccination.
Why?
Meningitis vaccinations applications are penalised in the pharmac process
because simply the more people that require a vaccine
have access to the vaccine,
the more people that need to be vaccinated.
So we're concerned that the vaccination rates
against the inclusion of that vaccine onto the schedule
because of the cost of the implementation.
If New Zealanders want it, we should give it to them.
These inequalities result in deaths and disabilities,
which are preventable.
Just change the slide.
Thank you.
The awareness or lack of it in 2023,
the Health Select Committee report recommended an awareness campaign.
During the period in the absence of a national campaign
from Towharaua, the foundation has led a nationwide awareness campaign.
It has produced and distributed 12,500 colouring in books,
which are in your handout.
It has developed a multilingual symptoms QR code
so that people can download the symptoms
and have it on their phone all the time.
And that improves access to key health information
for them.
We've distributed 8,500 pens and thousands of information brochures
throughout New Zealand universities.
Just to change the slide. Thank you.
The Managitis Foundation has also engaged with universities
across the country via social media.
We've been present at O-Weeks and wellness events
at most universities through New Zealand
and have engaged with thousands of students
during that process.
GSK has driven a television advertising programme
which has raised awareness.
The inconsistent messaging from medical professionals
has evidenced in the feedback from parents of students
and those that provide student accommodation,
which are in your handout, show that there's a complete,
still a lack of awareness around Managitis vaccination
and the need for it.
The underlying theme of all Managitis cases
is simply a lack of awareness.
Te Vata Ora are absent in all of the above.
Next slide, please.
Just to be mindful, we're a few minutes over time.
So our ask is that we need a bipartisan support
for a fully funded vaccination programme.
At minimum, eligibility for the vaccination programme
should be expanded to include all those
who are community services card holders.
We're asking for the support of the Managitis Foundation
for community services card holders.
We're asking for better after care for survivors
and refer to the research document in our handout
from Wellington University in that.
We'd also like improved monitoring
and faster notification of cases.
So we'd welcome any, thank you for your time
and welcome any questions.
Thank you. Thank you, Gerard.
We won't have time for questions, unfortunately,
but we don't necessarily know that we need them.
It's a horrific story, any.
And Gerard, I know from talking previously
what this has done to your family.
Mr Chair, with your permission,
could I be permitted just one very quick question to clarify?
Yes, you may.
Clarify that. Point two of your ask there.
Which age will the community service card
holders be in that proposal?
Our adolescents.
That's the second highest at risk.
Ideally, you want all adolescents
in that minimum community service card?
The best time to implement a vaccination program
is a school-based program
when they're actually, they need to be protected
before they go out into the community.
Thank you.
We thank you for your time.
I mean, you people have the chance to make a difference,
to save lives, to save disabilities,
so we're asking to take that opportunity.
Thank you very much for coming to Wellington today
and presenting to us.
It was a really impactful presentation from you both.
Thank you.